Phase 1 – Foundation

Goal: understand Django’s structure, ORM, and migrations.

Create your project manually:

django-admin startproject gedcomx_project
cd gedcomx_project
python manage.py startapp core


In core.models, hand-write:

BaseModel (with uri, timestamps)

A URIField using Django validators or rfc3986

A test Person table with name

Run:

python manage.py makemigrations
python manage.py migrate
python manage.py createsuperuser
python manage.py runserver


Explore the admin to see what migrations actually produce in your DB.

🧱 Phase 2 – Relational modeling

Goal: see how foreign keys and many-to-manys work.

Add a separate places app with PlaceDescription and PlaceResolution.

Create FK links manually.

Observe migration dependencies between apps.

Add a Fact model in persons with a place FK and test how cascading deletes behave.

Use the Django shell (python manage.py shell_plus) to experiment with:

p = Person.objects.create(uri="http://example.org/person/1", primary_name="John Doe")
f = Fact.objects.create(person=p, type_uri="http://gedcomx.org/Birth")

🔗 Phase 3 – Relationships and vocab

Goal: learn model interlinking and controlled vocabularies.

Manually add a VocabTerm table in a new vocab app.

Populate it with a fixture (loaddata) for GEDCOM X URIs.

Write queries that join facts to vocab terms.

📜 Phase 4 – Evidence and sources

Goal: see how one-to-many and optional references behave.

Build the sources app with SourceDescription and EvidenceReference.

Add an evidence foreign key to Fact manually, run migrations, and observe how Django rewrites the schema.

🧠 Phase 5 – Place resolution logic

Goal: get comfortable with management commands and services.

Create a resolve_places.py command that populates PlaceResolution entries from raw text.

Use pure Python functions first, no dependencies; later add fuzzy matching or PostGIS.

🧩 Phase 6 – APIs or Admin

Goal: see how to surface your data.

Register models manually in admin.py and play with inline relations.

Optionally, add Django REST Framework:

pip install djangorestframework


and build one serializer at a time.

🧭 Phase 7 – Reflection

When you’ve done all this, you’ll understand migrations, model relations, serialization, and query behavior deeply.
At that point, you can safely refactor the project into the modular structure we outlined earlier — or even teach it.
